.\" Copyright (c) 1993-1996 Andras Aszodi
.TH dragon 1 "22 May 1998" "Version 4.17"
.de BP
.sp
.ti \-.2i
\(**
..

.SH NAME
dragon \- Distance Geometry\-based protein modelling tool

.SH SYNOPSIS
.hy 0
.na
.B dragon \c
.RB "[\|" \-hMA "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" "\-c \fIcommand_file" "\|]"
.RB "[\|" "\-m \fIproc_no" "\|]"
.RB "[\|" "\-p \fIparam_file" "[\|" "\-r \fIrun_no" "\|]" "\|]"
.ad b
.hy 1
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dragon\c
\& obtains the tertiary fold of a small protein from a multiple
alignment of its sequence and homologous sequences, the secondary
structure assignment and a set of structure\-specific distance
restraints. Distance restraints can be obtained from known
structures whose sequences participate in the alignment.

.SH OPTIONS
If no options are given, the program enters 
.B interactive mode\c
\& and displays the "DRAGON>" prompt.

.TP
.B \-h
Prints a short help to the standard output, listing the version
number and the available command-line options, then exits.

.TP
.B "\-c \fIcommand_file"
Executes the 
.B dragon\c
\& commands in \fIcommand_file\fP. If no filename is given or
if \fIcommand_file\fP cannot be opened then the program
starts up in
.B interactive mode\c
\&. The commands

.B "dragon \-c \fIcommand_file"
.br
.B dragon\c
\& < \fIcommand_file\fP
.br
cat \fIcommand_file\fP | 
.B dragon

are all equivalent.

.TP
.B "\-m \fIproc_no"
Instructs
.B dragon\c
\& to spawn \fIproc_no\fP>=2 sub-processes when several simulation
runs are executed (see the
.B r[un]\c
\& command below). The simulation runs are distributed evenly
between the child processes. The parent process does not do
any work apart from monitoring the children and killing them
if <Ctrl-C> is pressed. Standard output and standard error from the children
are automatically written to logfiles, one per run (not per
child process) with the name ``\fIoutput_file\fP_k.log''
for the k-th run (cf. the parameter
.B Outfnm\c
\& below which specifies \fIoutput_file\fP). This option
implements coarse-grain parallelism on a multiprocessor machine.

.TP
.B \-M
Start up in Parallel Virtual Machine (PVM) mode. PVM is free software
developed at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory
which links heterogeneous UNIX workstations on a network into a
virtual multiprocessor machine. Under PVM, 
.B dragon -M\c
\& spawns a slave task on each node making up the virtual machine.
These slaves then perform the simulations requested by the
.B r[un]\c
\& command (see below). Before a run, the master process
checks the virtual machine configuration and therefore it is
possible to reconfigure it between runs without exiting from
.B dragon\c
\&. Load distribution is done using the "pool-of-tasks" 
paradigm: the master process sends a run to the first idle slave it can find,
thus sending more work to the faster ones.
The master task communicates with the user and coordinates
data message passing. Signals caught by the master are re-sent
to the slaves which trap them exactly in the same manner
as the single-process
.B dragon\c
\& would. Consequently, in contrast to the multiprocess run, the slaves
are not killed if <Ctrl-C> is caught by the master.
Standard output and standard error from the slaves
are automatically written to logfiles, one per slave
(not one per run) with the name ``\fIxxxxx@hostname\fP''
where \fIxxxxx\fP is the PVM task ID (a hexadecimal number)
and \fIhostname\fP is the name of the node the slave is running on.
This option implements coarse-grain parallelism if no real
multiprocessor machine is available. If PVM is running, then
the 
the 
.B -M\c
\& option overrides the
.B -m\c
\& option. If PVM is not available, then various error messages
will be printed by the PVM library but these can be ignored.
 
.TP
.B "\-p \fIparam_file [\-r \fIrun_no]"
Loads the parameters in \fIparam_file\fP into
.B dragon\c
\& and performs \fIrun_no\fP simulation runs. This option overrides
the 
.B -c\c
\&, 
.B -m\c
\& and
.B -M\c
\& options.

.TP
.B \-A
This option is not entirely serious. Prints The Answer and exits.

.SH COMMANDS
All commands are lowercase strings and the trailing
characters enclosed in square brackets can be omitted. Command names
and optional arguments are separated by whitespace.
Commands can be specified in ASCII text files where
only one command per line is allowed, or at the 
``DRAGON>'' prompt in interactive mode. Lines in command
files beginning with the character
.B #\c
\& are interpreted as comments and ignored. Commands can also
be piped to the
.B dragon\c
\& standard input in which case care should be taken to separate
them by newlines.

.TP
.B "c[ommand] \fIcommand_file"
Execute the commands in \fIcommand_file\fP. Command file calls
can be nested up to the maximal depth of 16. If \fIcommand_file\fP
is omitted then the program enters interactive mode. The number
of ``>'' characters following the ``DRAGON'' prompt indicates
the current call depth.

.TP
.B d[efault]
Reset all parameters to their default values.

.TP
.B h[elp]
Prints a short help on all available commands. This command works
in interactive mode only and is ignored when issued from within a command file.

.TP
.B "l[ist] \fIParam"
List a short description and the value of parameter \fIParam\fP
to the standard output. If \fIParam\fP is omitted, then all
parameters are listed.

.TP
.B o[s]
Invokes an OS shell (the user's default). Return to
.B dragon\c
\& by typing `exit'.

.TP
.B "p[aram] \fIparameter_file"
Reads the parameter specifications in \fIparameter_file\fP.
It is an error if the file cannot be opened. For the parameter
description format, refer to the section
.B PARAMETERS\c
\& below.

.TP
.B q[uit]
Quit 
.B dragon\c
\&. If invoked in a nested command file, then execution of the
file is terminated and control will be returned to the caller. 
.B dragon\c
\& exits only if 
.B quit\c
\& was issued at the topmost level. Since execution automatically
terminates at the end of command files anyway,
.B quit\c
\& is mainly useful in interactive mode. The program asks for 
confirmation before exiting.

.TP
.B "r[un] \fIrepetition"
Perform the simulation \fIrepetition\fP times using the current
parameters but starting with a different random distance matrix
each time. If \fIrepetition\fP is omitted, then one simulation
is carried out. Simulations can be interrupted by typing <Ctrl-C>.

.TP
.B "s[ave] \fIparameter_file"
Saves the parameters to \fIparameter_file\fP or to the standard
output if \fIparameter_file\fP is omitted. 

.SH PARAMETERS
Parameters are usually specified in an ASCII text file, one
parameter per line. The name of the parameters start with
uppercase letters (to distinguish them from the commands,
see above) and must be specified literally. Commands
and parameter specifications may be freely mixed: the line

.B "Param \fIvalue"

encountered in a command file instructs the interpreter to 
set the parameter
.B Param\c
\& to \fIvalue\fP. The parameter's
name and its value are separated by whitespaces. 
Invalid parameter names and malformed parameter
specifications are ignored silently.
All parameters
have default values. The default data files live in the `data'
subdirectory and are called ``DEFAULT.*''.
Numeric parameters have a default value and
a permitted range. If a specified value is outside the range,
it will be adjusted silently to the closest upper (or lower)
limit. All distance measurements are given in angstrom
units. Lines beginning with the character
.B #\c
\& are interpreted as comments in the parameter file.
 The full
list of parameters is saved to disk after each run
in the file "./DRAGON_LASTRUN.par" for reference. The following
parameters are available in the current version:-

.TP
.B "Accfnm \fIaccessibility_file"
Residues which are known to be either on the surface or buried
inside may be specified in this file. The default is none.

.TP
.B "Adistfnm \fIdistance_file"
Specifies the average distances of side-chain atoms from the C-alpha
atoms and from the centroid of the side chain. The default file
\fIdata/DEFAULT.acd\fP
contains data derived from the Ponder/Richards rotamer library.

.TP
.B "Alnfnm \fIalignment_file"
Contains a multiple sequence alignment in MULTAL
vertical format or GCG horizontal format (MSF). Both formats
are quite forgiving: see the User Guide for details.
The alignment file specifies the sequence of the
model chain (see
.B Masterno\c
\& below) and the conserved hydrophobicity scores are also
deduced from it. If \fIalignment_file\fP cannot be read,
then the program falls back to a ``default alignment file'' 
\fIdata/DEFAULT.aln\fP which is, of course, meaningless.

.TP
.B "Density \fIfloat"
The number of C\-alpha atoms per cubic angstroms. This value
is surprisingly constant for proteins: use the default value
with confidence if no better guess is available.

.TP
.B "Evfract \fIfloat"
Fraction of eigenvalues retained in each projection. A low
value means larger jumps in dimensionality towards 3D but
embedding accuracy is reduced. The default 0.95 is probably
inadequate for high-precision jobs: use 0.999 instead.

.TP
.B "Graph \fIinteger"
This option is ignored on non-SGI machines. When set to 1,
then the distance matrices are displayed in fancy graphics
windows, and the 3D iterations can be monitored in a little
molecular movie. The graphics display uses the SGI GL graphics
language. Unfortunately this option incurs a heavy performance
penalty and therefore should be switched off when not needed.

.TP
.B "Homfnm \fIhomologous_structure_file"
This file, if specified, contains the structure of one or more of the
sequences in the alignment in PDB format. Only monomeric structures
are considered: they may be separated by TER cards or enclosed
between MODEL/ENDMDL cards. Chain identifier characters are
ignored for the ATOM cards. The sequences belonging to the
structures are automatically
identified and then the structures are used as an additional source
of distance restraints. The distances between the positions
which are shorter than the maximal distance specified by 
.B Maxdist\c
\& (see below) are used as restraints for the model.
No file is specified as default.

.TP
.B "Masterno \fIinteger"
Specifies which sequence in the multiple alignment (see
.B Alnfnm\c
\& above) should serve as the ``master sequence'', i.e.
the model chain's sequence. If \fIinteger\fP=0 (the default), then
the consensus sequence of the alignment will be the
model sequence.

.TP
.B "Maxdist \fIfloat"
The maximal C-alpha distance between two residues
in the known structure(s) that
can participate in homology-derived distance restraints (see
.B Homfnm\c
\&). The default 
.B Maxdist\c
\& value is 5.0 angstroms, which roughly corresponds to the
first coordination sphere in protein interiors. Increased
.B Maxdist\c
\& values give better accuracy but the larger number of 
restraints may result in longer simulation times. This
parameter is ignored if 
.B Homfnm\c
\& is not specified (no homology modelling).

.TP
.B "Maxiter \fIinteger"
The number of refinement iterations in 3D (default 40).
This is probably a good compromise.

.TP
.B "Minchange \fIfloat"
The minimal change of the steric violation and distance scores
between two iterations. Serves as an exit criterion.

.TP
.B "Minscore \fIfloat"
The minimal value of the steric violation and distance scores.
The simulation exits when the scores fall below this value.

.TP
.B "Minsepar \fIinteger"
The minimal separation between two residues for which a homology
restraint will be generated. This parameter has to be larger than or
equal to 2 (the default value).

.TP
.B "Outfnm \fIresult_file"
Specifies the name of the result file (default ``DRAGON_OUT'').
The best simulation result is saved to this file in PDB format,
listing the C-alpha atoms and the fake sidechain centroids
as C-beta atoms, as well as the sequence and secondary structure assignment.
The result of the k-th run will be saved
as ``\fIoutput_file\fP_k.pdb'', restraint violations are written
to ``\fIoutput_file\fP_k.viol''.

.TP
.B "Phobfnm \fIphobicity_file"
Specifies the amino acid hydrophobicity values, the
default values are in \fIdata/DEFAULT.pho\fP. No need to be changed.

.TP
.B "Randseed \fIinteger"
This number serves as the seed for the random number generator
used to fill up the initial distance matrix. If \fIinteger\fP=0 (the default),
then the random number generator will be seeded with the
output of \fItime(NULL)\fP, otherwise with \fIinteger\fP.
In the latter case, two consecutive runs shall give exactly
the same result (useful mainly for debugging).

.TP
.B "Restrfnm \fIrestraint_file"
Contains the list of external distance restraints. Restraints may
be specified between C-alpha, side-chain atoms or a
pseudo-atom called `SCC' (side chain centroid)
in the form of lower/upper\-limit pairs with a ``strictness''
value. Atom names should follow the PDB conventions.
No file is specified as the default, meaning that no
external distance restraints are available.

.TP
.B "Simfnm \fIsimilarity_file"
Specifies the amino acid similarity matrix. The default file
\fIdata/DEFAULT.sim\fP
contains Dayhoff's PAM250 matrix. A variety of other similarity
matrices are also available in \fIdata/*.sim\fP files.

.TP
.B "Speceps \fIprecision"
Spectral Gradient is an iterative optimisation method used to move a set of
points in Euclidean space so that their distances correspond to a prescribed
distance matrix (see Wells et al, J. Mol. Struct. 308:
263-271 (1994)  for a detailed description). This parameter sets the precision
for the iteration: when the relative stress change is less than
.B Speceps\c
\&, then the iteration is terminated. Lower values mean more
iterations.

.TP
.B "Speciter \fIiter_no"
This parameter controls the maximal number of Spectral Gradient iterations
used in Euclidean adjustments. Sometimes the method does not converge, in these
cases 
.B dragon\c
\& performs a less elegant but more
robust steepest descent-like optimisation.

.TP
.B "Sstrfnm \fIsecondary_structure_file"
This file holds the secondary structure assignments. Currently
3/10\-, alpha\- and pi\-helices and beta\-sheets are implemented. The user must
supply the alignment information for strands in a beta\-sheet.
Bifurcated sheets may be specified as overlapping "normal" sheets
following the PDB convention. A warning is issued when overlapping
sheets are encountered: all other overlapping secondary structure
elements are ignored. An optional "strictness" value between 0.0 and
1.0 may be specified for each secondary structure element in the
file which regulates the extent to which ideal secondary structure
is enforced on the model. 
.B dragon\c
\& lists the accepted secondary structure specification
to stdout prior to the runs which can be used to verify that
the assignment supplied in the 
.B Sstrfnm\c
\& file was correct. No file is specified as default.
Note, however, that currently a valid secondary structure
is necessary to perform detangling and 
.B dragon\c
\& cannot predict secondary structure on its own yet.

.TP
.B "Tangiter \fIinteger"
Maximal number of detangling iterations (default 5). The detangling
tries to get rid of the tangled conformations which are an
annoying artefact of Distance Geometry projections. The default
iteration number is probably a safe compromise between
speed and efficiency. Note that detangling cannot be
carried out if no secondary structure was specified.

.TP
.B "Volfnm \fIvolume_file"
Specifies the average amino acid side-chain volumes,
the default values are in \fIdata/DEFAULT.vol\fP. No need to be changed.

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.B dragon\c
\& can generate various error messages of the form
.br
[
.B ?!\c
\&] \fIclass\fP::\fImethod\fP: message

where the prefix 
.B ?\c
\& indicates warnings (recoverable errors),
the prefix
.B !\c
\& indicates fatal errors,
\fIclass\fP and \fImethod\fP specify where the error occurred
in the source. Most warnings are printed when an input file
is inaccessible or syntactically incorrect. The ``centre_dist''
method occasionally complains about negative distances when
the input matrix is non-metric: this is normal and can safely
be ignored. Fatal errors always indicate a bug in the code.
.br
If PVM is available but 
.B dragon\c
\& was invoked without the 
.B \-M\c
\& flag, then the "Pvmtask_::enrol_pvm(SLAVE)" method will 
complain about a missing parent task. This is harmless.
If PVM is not running then some messages about missing tempfiles
from "libpvm" may also be printed during startup.

.B dragon\c
\& catches the following signals: SIGHUP, SIGINT, SIGQUIT,
SIGFPE, SIGPIPE, SIGALRM, SIGTERM, SIGPWR and aborts execution
immediately except on receiving SIGINT which terminates the current
simulation run only. The program returns with status code 0
on normal termination (including a caught <Ctrl-C>), otherwise
a nonzero status code is returned which is equal to the int
value of the signal caught.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
Aszodi, A. and Taylor, W. R. (1994): Folding polypeptide alpha\-carbon
backbones by distance geometry methods. Biopolymers \fI34\fP, 489\-505.
.br
Aszodi, A. and Taylor, W. R. (1994): Secondary structure formation
in model polypeptide chains. Prot. Engng. \fI7\fP, 633\-644.
.br
Aszodi, A. and Taylor, W. R. (1995): Estimating polypeptide alpha\-carbon
distances from multiple sequence alignments. J. Math. Chem. \fI17\fP, 167\-184.
.br
Aszodi, A., Gradwell, M. J. and Taylor, W. R. (1995): 
Global fold determination from a small number of distance restraints. 
J. Mol. Biol. \fI251\fP, 308\-326.
.br
Aszodi, A. and Taylor, W. R. (1996):
Hierarchic inertial projection: A fast distance matrix embedding algorithm.
Computers and Chemistry (in press)
.br
Aszodi, A. and Taylor, W. R. (1996):
Homology modelling by distance geometry.
Folding and Design\fI1\fP, 325\-334.
.br
Aszodi, A: The ``DRAGON'' User Manual.
.br
Al Geist et al.: The PVM 3 User Manual.

.SH AUTHORS
The DRAGON algorithms were designed by Andras Aszodi and Willie Taylor
and the program was implemented by Andras Aszodi. The authors
retain all intellectual property rights. We can be reached
by e-mail at the following addresses:-
.br
a-aszodi@nimr.mrc.ac.uk
.br
w_taylor@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

.SH PORTABILITY
Currently implemented on SGI workstations running IRIX 5.3 or
higher, and on Intel-based PCs running Linux 2.0.x. The source code
corresponds to the 3.0 version of C++ as defined in the
\fIAnnotated C++ Reference Manual\fP. The C modules conform
to pure ANSI C. Porting to other UNIX platforms should be
relatively easy apart from possible template linking problems.
The authors regret that the source code cannot
be made publicly available.

.SH BUGS
Might creep out of the dark corners of the code.

.SH FEATURES
Under PVM, both the master and the slaves go to sleep for 1-second
intervals before checking the message queue. This causes a little
delay between issuing the
.B r[un]\c
\& command and the first reports from the slaves. However, a lot
of CPU cycles are saved this way when the tasks are idle.

.SH DISCLAIMER
This program is provided ``as is'' with no warranties, express or implied,
whatsoever. The fact that this software has been made publicly available
does not mean that the software is suitable for any particular
purpose. The authors will assume no responsibility for any damages
arising from the use of the software. Bug reports and suggestions
are welcome but we cannot guarantee support of any sort.
