.\" Copyright (c) 1993-1996 Andras Aszodi
.TH sidech 1 "5 June 1996"
.de BP
.sp
.ti \-.2i
\(**
..

.SH NAME
sidech \-partial sidechain generator

.SH SYNOPSIS
.hy 0
.na
.B sidech \c
\fIMULTAL backbone homstruct outfile\fP
.ad b
.hy 1
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B sidech\c
\& generates partial sidechains for protein backbone
homology models created with
.B dragon\c
\&. Equivalent sidechains are averaged and those atoms which
correspond to the target residues are transferred onto the
backbone. The program requires the following input files:

.TP
\fIMULTAL\fP
The multiple alignment in vertical MULTAL format.
This should be the same as the "\fIAlnfnm\fP" parameter
in the DRAGON simulations.

.TP
\fIbackbone\fP
This PDB file should contain the coordinates of the
model backbone. The recommended technique is to average
the C\-alpha backbone results from 
.B dragon\c
\&'s output, add peptide atoms to it using the
.B catomain\c
\& program (by Michael Levitt) and use this as the
backbone of the target.

.TP
\fIhomstruct\fP
This PDB file should contain the chains of the known
structures used in homology modelling (the same as the
"\fIHomfnm\fP" parameter in the DRAGON simulations).

.TP
\fIoutfile\fP
The sidechain-decorated backbone is written to this file
in PDB format.

.SH NOTE
.B sidech\c
\& generates only a partial side chain for an amino acid in
the target for which all equivalent residues are of different
types. If there are no equivalent amino acids (all homologous
structures are gapped), then no main-chain is generated.
The missing atoms in the output of
.B sidech\c
\& should be generated by another utility such as CHARMM.

.SH AUTHOR
Andras Aszodi (a-aszodi@nimr.mrc.ac.uk).

.SH DISCLAIMER
This program is provided ``as is'' with no warranties, express or implied,
whatsoever. The fact that this software has been made publicly available
does not mean that the software is suitable for any particular
purpose. The author will assume no responsibility for any damages
arising from the use of the software. Bug reports and suggestions
are welcome but I cannot guarantee support of any sort.
